docs/references/observability.rst, before:

.. _observability:

Observability
#############

Observability allows measuring a system's current state based on the data it generates, such as logs, metrics, and traces.

.. contents::
   :depth: 1
   :local:
   :backlinks: none

.. _pgrst_logging:

Logs
====

PostgREST logs basic request information to ``stdout``, including the authenticated user if available, the requesting IP address and user agent, the URL requested, and HTTP response status.

.. code::

   127.0.0.1 - user [26/Jul/2021:01:56:38 -0500] "GET /clients HTTP/1.1" 200 - "" "curl/7.64.0"
   127.0.0.1 - anonymous [26/Jul/2021:01:56:48 -0500] "GET /unexistent HTTP/1.1" 404 - "" "curl/7.64.0"

For diagnostic information about the server itself, PostgREST logs to ``stderr``:

  - The full version of the connected PostgreSQL database.
  - :ref:`schema_cache` statistics.
  - The messages received by the :ref:`listener`.

.. code::

   06/May/2024:08:16:11 -0500: Starting PostgREST 12.1...
   06/May/2024:08:16:11 -0500: Successfully connected to PostgreSQL 14.10 (Ubuntu 14.10-0ubuntu0.22.04.1) on x86_64-pc-linux-gnu, compiled by gcc (Ubuntu 11.4.0-1ubuntu1~22.04) 11.4.0, 64-bit
   06/May/2024:08:16:11 -0500: Connection Pool initialized with a maximum size of 10 connections
   06/May/2024:08:16:11 -0500: API server listening on port 3000
   06/May/2024:08:16:11 -0500: Listening for database notifications on the "pgrst" channel
   06/May/2024:08:16:11 -0500: Config reloaded
   06/May/2024:08:16:11 -0500: Schema cache queried in 3.8 milliseconds
   06/May/2024:08:16:11 -0500: Schema cache loaded 15 Relations, 8 Relationships, 8 Functions, 0 Domain Representations, 4 Media Type Handlers
   06/May/2024:14:11:27 -0500: Received a config reload message on the "pgrst" channel
   06/May/2024:14:11:27 -0500: Config reloaded

Database Logs
-------------

Currently PostgREST doesn't log the SQL commands executed against the underlying database.

To find the SQL operations, you can watch the database logs. By default PostgreSQL does not keep these logs, so you'll need to make the configuration changes below.

Find :code:`postgresql.conf` inside your PostgreSQL data directory (to find that, issue the command :code:`show data_directory;`). Either find the settings scattered throughout the file and change them to the following values, or append this block of code to the end of the configuration file.

.. code:: sql

  # send logs where the collector can access them
  log_destination = "stderr"

  # collect stderr output to log files
  logging_collector = on

  # save logs in pg_log/ under the pg data directory
  log_directory = "pg_log"

  # (optional) new log file per day
  log_filename = "postgresql-%Y-%m-%d.log"

  # log every kind of SQL statement
  log_statement = "all"

Restart the database and watch the log file in real-time to understand how HTTP requests are being translated into SQL commands.

.. note::

  On Docker you can enable the logs by using a custom ``init.sh``:

  .. code:: bash

    #!/bin/sh
    echo "log_statement = 'all'" >> /var/lib/postgresql/data/postgresql.conf

  After that you can start the container and check the logs with ``docker logs``.

  .. code:: bash

    docker run -v "$(pwd)/init.sh":"/docker-entrypoint-initdb.d/init.sh" -d postgres
    docker logs -f <container-id>

.. _metrics:

Metrics
=======

The ``metrics`` endpoint on the :ref:`admin_server` endpoint provides metrics in `Prometheus text format <https://prometheus.io/docs/instrumenting/exposition_formats/#text-based-format>`_.

.. code-block:: bash

  curl "http://localhost:3001/metrics"

  # HELP pgrst_schema_cache_query_time_seconds The query time in seconds of the last schema cache load
  # TYPE pgrst_schema_cache_query_time_seconds gauge
  pgrst_schema_cache_query_time_seconds 1.5937927e-2
  # HELP pgrst_schema_cache_loads_total The total number of times the schema cache was loaded
  # TYPE pgrst_schema_cache_loads_total counter
  pgrst_schema_cache_loads_total 1.0
  ...

Schema Cache Metrics
--------------------

Metrics related to the :ref:`schema_cache`.

pgrst_schema_cache_query_time_seconds
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

======== =======
**Type** Gauge
======== =======

The query time in seconds of the last schema cache load.

pgrst_schema_cache_loads_total
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

========== ==========================
**Type**   Counter
**Labels** ``status``: SUCCESS | FAIL
========== ==========================

The total number of times the schema cache was loaded.

Connection Pool Metrics
-----------------------

Metrics related to the :ref:`connection_pool`.

pgrst_db_pool_timeouts_total
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

======== =======
**Type** Counter
======== =======

The total number of pool connection timeouts.

pgrst_db_pool_available
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

======== =======
**Type** Gauge
======== =======

Available connections in the pool.

pgrst_db_pool_waiting
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

======== =======
**Type** Gauge
======== =======

Requests waiting to acquire a pool connection

pgrst_db_pool_max
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

======== =======
**Type** Gauge
======== =======

Max pool connections.

Traces
======

Server Version Header
---------------------

When debugging a problem it's important to verify the running PostgREST version. For this you can look at the :code:`Server` HTTP response header that is returned on every request.

.. code::

  HEAD /users HTTP/1.1

  Server: postgrest/11.0.1

.. _trace_header:

Trace Header
------------

You can enable tracing HTTP requests by setting :ref:`server-trace-header`. Specify the set header in the request, and the server will include it in the response.

.. code:: bash

  server-trace-header = "X-Request-Id"

.. code-block:: bash

  curl "http://localhost:3000/users" \
    -H "X-Request-Id: 123"

.. code::

  HTTP/1.1 200 OK
  X-Request-Id: 123

.. _server-timing_header:

Server-Timing Header
--------------------

You can enable the `Server-Timing <https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Server-Timing>`_ header by setting :ref:`server-timing-enabled` on.
This header communicates metrics of the different phases in the request-response cycle.

.. code-block:: bash

  curl "http://localhost:3000/users" -i

.. code::

  HTTP/1.1 200 OK

  Server-Timing: jwt;dur=14.9, parse;dur=71.1, plan;dur=109.0, transaction;dur=353.2, response;dur=4.4

- All the durations (``dur``) are in milliseconds.
- The ``jwt`` stage is when :ref:`jwt_impersonation` is done. This duration can be lowered with :ref:`jwt_caching`.
- On the ``parse`` stage, the :ref:`url_grammar` is parsed.
- On the ``plan`` stage, the :ref:`schema_cache` is used to generate the :ref:`main_query` of the transaction.
- The ``transaction`` stage corresponds to the database transaction. See :ref:`transactions`.
- The ``response`` stage is where the response status and headers are computed.

.. note::

  We're working on lowering the duration of the ``parse`` and ``plan`` stages on https://github.com/PostgREST/postgrest/issues/2816.

.. _explain_plan:

Execution plan
--------------

You can get the `EXPLAIN execution plan <https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/sql-explain.html>`_ of a request by adding the ``Accept: application/vnd.pgrst.plan`` header.
This is enabled by :ref:`db-plan-enabled` (false by default).

.. code-block:: bash

  curl "http://localhost:3000/users?select=name&order=id" \
    -H "Accept: application/vnd.pgrst.plan"

.. code-block:: postgres

  Aggregate  (cost=73.65..73.68 rows=1 width=112)
    ->  Index Scan using users_pkey on users  (cost=0.15..60.90 rows=850 width=36)

The output of the plan is generated in ``text`` format by default but you can change it to JSON by using the ``+json`` suffix.

.. code-block:: bash

  curl "http://localhost:3000/users?select=name&order=id" \
    -H "Accept: application/vnd.pgrst.plan+json"

.. code-block:: json

  [
    {
      "Plan": {
        "Node Type": "Aggregate",
        "Strategy": "Plain",
        "Partial Mode": "Simple",
        "Parallel Aware": false,
        "Async Capable": false,
        "Startup Cost": 73.65,
        "Total Cost": 73.68,
        "Plan Rows": 1,
        "Plan Width": 112,
        "Plans": [
          {
            "Node Type": "Index Scan",
            "Parent Relationship": "Outer",
            "Parallel Aware": false,
            "Async Capable": false,
            "Scan Direction": "Forward",
            "Index Name": "users_pkey",
            "Relation Name": "users",
            "Alias": "users",
            "Startup Cost": 0.15,
            "Total Cost": 60.90,
            "Plan Rows": 850,
            "Plan Width": 36
          }
        ]
      }
    }
  ]

By default the plan is assumed to generate the JSON representation of a resource(``application/json``), but you can obtain the plan for the :ref:`different representations that PostgREST supports <res_format>` by adding them to the ``for`` parameter. For instance, to obtain the plan for a ``text/xml``, you would use ``Accept: application/vnd.pgrst.plan; for="text/xml``.

The other available parameters are ``analyze``, ``verbose``, ``settings``, ``buffers`` and ``wal``, which correspond to the `EXPLAIN command options <https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/sql-explain.html>`_. To use the ``analyze`` and ``wal`` parameters for example, you would add them like ``Accept: application/vnd.pgrst.plan; options=analyze|wal``.

Note that akin to the EXPLAIN command, the changes will be committed when using the ``analyze`` option. To avoid this, you can use the :ref:`db-tx-end` and the ``Prefer: tx=rollback`` header.

Securing the Execution Plan
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

It's recommended to only activate :ref:`db-plan-enabled` on testing environments since it reveals internal database details.
However, if you choose to use it in production you can add a :ref:`db-pre-request` to filter the requests that can use this feature.

For example, to only allow requests from an IP address to get the execution plans:

.. code-block:: postgres

 -- Assuming a proxy(Nginx, Cloudflare, etc) passes an "X-Forwarded-For" header(https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/X-Forwarded-For)
 create or replace function filter_plan_requests()
 returns void as $$
 declare
   headers   json := current_setting('request.headers', true)::json;
   client_ip text := coalesce(headers->>'x-forwarded-for', '');
   accept    text := coalesce(headers->>'accept', '');
 begin
   if accept like 'application/vnd.pgrst.plan%' and client_ip != '144.96.121.73' then
     raise insufficient_privilege using
       message = 'Not allowed to use application/vnd.pgrst.plan';
   end if;
 end; $$ language plpgsql;

 -- set this function on your postgrest.conf
 -- db-pre-request = filter_plan_requests

.. raw:: html

  <script type="text/javascript">
    let hash = window.location.hash;

    const redirects = {
      '#health_check': 'health_check.html',
      '#server-version': '#server-version-header',
    };

    let willRedirectTo = redirects[hash];

    if (willRedirectTo) {
      window.location.href = willRedirectTo;
    }
  </script>

Commit message:

feat: allow logging the SQL query to stderr
- Logs the main SQL query when `log-query=true`.
- Only logs at the current `log-level`.

docs/references/observability.rst, after:

.. _observability:

Observability
#############

Observability allows measuring a system's current state based on the data it generates, such as logs, metrics, and traces.

.. contents::
   :depth: 1
   :local:
   :backlinks: none

.. _pgrst_logging:

Logs
====

PostgREST logs basic request information to ``stdout``, including the authenticated user if available, the requesting IP address and user agent, the URL requested, and HTTP response status.

.. code::

   127.0.0.1 - user [26/Jul/2021:01:56:38 -0500] "GET /clients HTTP/1.1" 200 - "" "curl/7.64.0"
   127.0.0.1 - anonymous [26/Jul/2021:01:56:48 -0500] "GET /unexistent HTTP/1.1" 404 - "" "curl/7.64.0"

For diagnostic information about the server itself, PostgREST logs to ``stderr``:

  - The full version of the connected PostgreSQL database.
  - :ref:`schema_cache` statistics.
  - The messages received by the :ref:`listener`.

.. code::

   06/May/2024:08:16:11 -0500: Starting PostgREST 12.1...
   06/May/2024:08:16:11 -0500: Successfully connected to PostgreSQL 14.10 (Ubuntu 14.10-0ubuntu0.22.04.1) on x86_64-pc-linux-gnu, compiled by gcc (Ubuntu 11.4.0-1ubuntu1~22.04) 11.4.0, 64-bit
   06/May/2024:08:16:11 -0500: Connection Pool initialized with a maximum size of 10 connections
   06/May/2024:08:16:11 -0500: API server listening on port 3000
   06/May/2024:08:16:11 -0500: Listening for database notifications on the "pgrst" channel
   06/May/2024:08:16:11 -0500: Config reloaded
   06/May/2024:08:16:11 -0500: Schema cache queried in 3.8 milliseconds
   06/May/2024:08:16:11 -0500: Schema cache loaded 15 Relations, 8 Relationships, 8 Functions, 0 Domain Representations, 4 Media Type Handlers
   06/May/2024:14:11:27 -0500: Received a config reload message on the "pgrst" channel
   06/May/2024:14:11:27 -0500: Config reloaded

.. _sql_query_logs:

SQL Query Logs
--------------

To log the :ref:`main SQL query <main_query>` executed for a request, set the :ref:`log-query` to ``main-query``.
It will be logged based on the current :ref:`log-level` setting.
For example, with this configuration:

.. code-block:: bash

  log-level = "warn"
  log-query = "main-query"

The SQL queries will only be logged on ``400`` HTTP errors and up.
So, if the user requests a resource without sufficient privileges:

.. code-block:: bash

  curl "localhost:3000/protected_table"

This will be logged by PostgREST:

.. code::

  17/Feb/2025:17:28:15 -0500: WITH pgrst_source AS ( SELECT "public"."protected_table".* FROM "public"."protected_table"  )  SELECT null::bigint AS total_result_set, pg_catalog.count(_postgrest_t) AS page_total, coalesce(json_agg(_postgrest_t), '[]') AS body, nullif(current_setting('response.headers', true), '') AS response_headers, nullif(current_setting('response.status', true), '') AS response_status, '' AS response_inserted FROM ( SELECT * FROM pgrst_source ) _postgrest_t
  127.0.0.1 - web_anon [17/Feb/2025:17:28:15 -0500] "GET /protected_table HTTP/1.1" 401 - "" "curl/8.7.1"

Database Logs
-------------

Additionally, to find all the SQL operations, you can watch the database logs. By default PostgreSQL does not keep these logs, so you'll need to make the configuration changes below.

Find :code:`postgresql.conf` inside your PostgreSQL data directory (to find that, issue the command :code:`show data_directory;`). Either find the settings scattered throughout the file and change them to the following values, or append this block of code to the end of the configuration file.

.. code:: sql

  # send logs where the collector can access them
  log_destination = "stderr"

  # collect stderr output to log files
  logging_collector = on

  # save logs in pg_log/ under the pg data directory
  log_directory = "pg_log"

  # (optional) new log file per day
  log_filename = "postgresql-%Y-%m-%d.log"

  # log every kind of SQL statement
  log_statement = "all"

Restart the database and watch the log file in real-time to understand how HTTP requests are being translated into SQL commands.

.. note::

  On Docker you can enable the logs by using a custom ``init.sh``:

  .. code:: bash

    #!/bin/sh
    echo "log_statement = 'all'" >> /var/lib/postgresql/data/postgresql.conf

  After that you can start the container and check the logs with ``docker logs``.

  .. code:: bash

    docker run -v "$(pwd)/init.sh":"/docker-entrypoint-initdb.d/init.sh" -d postgres
    docker logs -f <container-id>

.. _metrics:

Metrics
=======

The ``metrics`` endpoint on the :ref:`admin_server` endpoint provides metrics in `Prometheus text format <https://prometheus.io/docs/instrumenting/exposition_formats/#text-based-format>`_.

.. code-block:: bash

  curl "http://localhost:3001/metrics"

  # HELP pgrst_schema_cache_query_time_seconds The query time in seconds of the last schema cache load
  # TYPE pgrst_schema_cache_query_time_seconds gauge
  pgrst_schema_cache_query_time_seconds 1.5937927e-2
  # HELP pgrst_schema_cache_loads_total The total number of times the schema cache was loaded
  # TYPE pgrst_schema_cache_loads_total counter
  pgrst_schema_cache_loads_total 1.0
  ...

Schema Cache Metrics
--------------------

Metrics related to the :ref:`schema_cache`.

pgrst_schema_cache_query_time_seconds
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

======== =======
**Type** Gauge
======== =======

The query time in seconds of the last schema cache load.

pgrst_schema_cache_loads_total
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

========== ==========================
**Type**   Counter
**Labels** ``status``: SUCCESS | FAIL
========== ==========================

The total number of times the schema cache was loaded.

Connection Pool Metrics
-----------------------

Metrics related to the :ref:`connection_pool`.

pgrst_db_pool_timeouts_total
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

======== =======
**Type** Counter
======== =======

The total number of pool connection timeouts.

pgrst_db_pool_available
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

======== =======
**Type** Gauge
======== =======

Available connections in the pool.

pgrst_db_pool_waiting
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

======== =======
**Type** Gauge
======== =======

Requests waiting to acquire a pool connection

pgrst_db_pool_max
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

======== =======
**Type** Gauge
======== =======

Max pool connections.

Traces
======

Server Version Header
---------------------

When debugging a problem it's important to verify the running PostgREST version. For this you can look at the :code:`Server` HTTP response header that is returned on every request.

.. code::

  HEAD /users HTTP/1.1

  Server: postgrest/11.0.1

.. _trace_header:

Trace Header
------------

You can enable tracing HTTP requests by setting :ref:`server-trace-header`. Specify the set header in the request, and the server will include it in the response.

.. code:: bash

  server-trace-header = "X-Request-Id"

.. code-block:: bash

  curl "http://localhost:3000/users" \
    -H "X-Request-Id: 123"

.. code::

  HTTP/1.1 200 OK
  X-Request-Id: 123

.. _server-timing_header:

Server-Timing Header
--------------------

You can enable the `Server-Timing <https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Server-Timing>`_ header by setting :ref:`server-timing-enabled` on.
This header communicates metrics of the different phases in the request-response cycle.

.. code-block:: bash

  curl "http://localhost:3000/users" -i

.. code::

  HTTP/1.1 200 OK

  Server-Timing: jwt;dur=14.9, parse;dur=71.1, plan;dur=109.0, transaction;dur=353.2, response;dur=4.4

- All the durations (``dur``) are in milliseconds.
- The ``jwt`` stage is when :ref:`jwt_impersonation` is done. This duration can be lowered with :ref:`jwt_caching`.
- On the ``parse`` stage, the :ref:`url_grammar` is parsed.
- On the ``plan`` stage, the :ref:`schema_cache` is used to generate the :ref:`main_query` of the transaction.
- The ``transaction`` stage corresponds to the database transaction. See :ref:`transactions`.
- The ``response`` stage is where the response status and headers are computed.

.. note::

  We're working on lowering the duration of the ``parse`` and ``plan`` stages on https://github.com/PostgREST/postgrest/issues/2816.

.. _explain_plan:

Execution plan
--------------

You can get the `EXPLAIN execution plan <https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/sql-explain.html>`_ of a request by adding the ``Accept: application/vnd.pgrst.plan`` header.
This is enabled by :ref:`db-plan-enabled` (false by default).

.. code-block:: bash

  curl "http://localhost:3000/users?select=name&order=id" \
    -H "Accept: application/vnd.pgrst.plan"

.. code-block:: postgres

  Aggregate  (cost=73.65..73.68 rows=1 width=112)
    ->  Index Scan using users_pkey on users  (cost=0.15..60.90 rows=850 width=36)

The output of the plan is generated in ``text`` format by default but you can change it to JSON by using the ``+json`` suffix.

.. code-block:: bash

  curl "http://localhost:3000/users?select=name&order=id" \
    -H "Accept: application/vnd.pgrst.plan+json"

.. code-block:: json

  [
    {
      "Plan": {
        "Node Type": "Aggregate",
        "Strategy": "Plain",
        "Partial Mode": "Simple",
        "Parallel Aware": false,
        "Async Capable": false,
        "Startup Cost": 73.65,
        "Total Cost": 73.68,
        "Plan Rows": 1,
        "Plan Width": 112,
        "Plans": [
          {
            "Node Type": "Index Scan",
            "Parent Relationship": "Outer",
            "Parallel Aware": false,
            "Async Capable": false,
            "Scan Direction": "Forward",
            "Index Name": "users_pkey",
            "Relation Name": "users",
            "Alias": "users",
            "Startup Cost": 0.15,
            "Total Cost": 60.90,
            "Plan Rows": 850,
            "Plan Width": 36
          }
        ]
      }
    }
  ]

By default the plan is assumed to generate the JSON representation of a resource(``application/json``), but you can obtain the plan for the :ref:`different representations that PostgREST supports <res_format>` by adding them to the ``for`` parameter. For instance, to obtain the plan for a ``text/xml``, you would use ``Accept: application/vnd.pgrst.plan; for="text/xml``.

The other available parameters are ``analyze``, ``verbose``, ``settings``, ``buffers`` and ``wal``, which correspond to the `EXPLAIN command options <https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/sql-explain.html>`_. To use the ``analyze`` and ``wal`` parameters for example, you would add them like ``Accept: application/vnd.pgrst.plan; options=analyze|wal``.

Note that akin to the EXPLAIN command, the changes will be committed when using the ``analyze`` option. To avoid this, you can use the :ref:`db-tx-end` and the ``Prefer: tx=rollback`` header.

Securing the Execution Plan
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

It's recommended to only activate :ref:`db-plan-enabled` on testing environments since it reveals internal database details.
However, if you choose to use it in production you can add a :ref:`db-pre-request` to filter the requests that can use this feature.

For example, to only allow requests from an IP address to get the execution plans:

.. code-block:: postgres

 -- Assuming a proxy(Nginx, Cloudflare, etc) passes an "X-Forwarded-For" header(https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/X-Forwarded-For)
 create or replace function filter_plan_requests()
 returns void as $$
 declare
   headers   json := current_setting('request.headers', true)::json;
   client_ip text := coalesce(headers->>'x-forwarded-for', '');
   accept    text := coalesce(headers->>'accept', '');
 begin
   if accept like 'application/vnd.pgrst.plan%' and client_ip != '144.96.121.73' then
     raise insufficient_privilege using
       message = 'Not allowed to use application/vnd.pgrst.plan';
   end if;
 end; $$ language plpgsql;

 -- set this function on your postgrest.conf
 -- db-pre-request = filter_plan_requests

.. raw:: html

  <script type="text/javascript">
    let hash = window.location.hash;

    const redirects = {
      '#health_check': 'health_check.html',
      '#server-version': '#server-version-header',
    };

    let willRedirectTo = redirects[hash];

    if (willRedirectTo) {
      window.location.href = willRedirectTo;
    }
  </script>
